sui-core: add address balances design docs (#26532)
MystenLabs/sui: crates/sui-core/src/accumulators/design_docs/address_funds_scheduling.md

# Address Funds Withdraw Scheduling

This document covers the **pre-execution** sufficiency check for address-owned virtual balance
withdrawals — the work done by `FundsWithdrawScheduler` (under
`crates/sui-core/src/execution_scheduler/funds_withdraw_scheduler/address_funds/`) before a
withdrawing transaction is allowed to execute.

For the on-chain data layout, see [`data_model.md`](./data_model.md). For how a withdraw is
declared and how settlement transactions are constructed, see
[`write_path.md`](./write_path.md). For the post-execution sufficiency check used for
**object-owned** accumulator accounts, see
[`object_funds_checking.md`](./object_funds_checking.md).

## 1. Inputs and outputs

### What "address funds" means here

Address-funds withdrawals are withdrawals from address-owned accumulator accounts where the
*maximum* withdrawal amount is known **before execution**. The transaction data declares an
upper bound (`Reservation::MaxAmountU64`) on how much each account may withdraw — the actual
amount withdrawn during execution can be smaller (or even zero), but never larger. This upper

> bound is enough to check sufficiency before the Move VM starts: if the account doesn't have

Reviewer: This really doesn't have anything to do with the Move VM directly. And in that there is a lot that happens to execute a transaction outside of the VM. So I'll be leaving similar nits around.

I think "PTB execution" would also be a decent replacement

```suggestion
bound is enough to check sufficiency before transaction execution starts: if the account doesn't have
```

enough to cover the declared maximum, the transaction is guaranteed to fail, so we skip
execution entirely and return an early error.

> Object-funds withdrawals (where the amount is known only after the Move VM runs) are out of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Object-funds withdrawals (where the amount is known only after the transaction is executed) are out of
```

3. **Settlement and barrier transactions** are handled by `SettlementScheduler` (see
   [`write_path.md`](./write_path.md) §4 and §5). When their effects materialize,
   `settle_address_funds` is called to update the scheduler's in-memory state.

```
  Consensus          Withdraw            Execution
   Output    ──────> Scheduler  ──────>   Queue
              gate:                     (ready to
              "does this tx             execute)
               have enough
               funds?"

                         │
              Settlement │ called after settlement +
              (validator │ barrier txns execute (early
                  path)  │ settlement / checkpoint builder)
                         ▼
              Scheduler updates its
              internal balance state
```

When a checkpoint is being applied via the **checkpoint executor**
([`write_path.md`](./write_path.md) §5), the settlement and barrier transactions run through
the normal execution pipeline like any other system transaction, and the on-chain state
advances. But because the node didn't construct those transactions, `settle_address_funds` is

> **not** invoked. The scheduler is designed to handle this gracefully — see §3 below for the

Reviewer: Maybe have an anchor link for "§3 below"

specific in-memory checks that keep the scheduler consistent with storage.

### After scheduling

Once the scheduler returns a result for a transaction:

- **SufficientFunds** — the transaction is re-enqueued into the normal execution pipeline. It

>   will execute its Move code normally, and the withdrawal will happen as part of execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  will execute the transaction normally, and the withdrawal will happen as part of execution.
```

- **InsufficientFunds** — the transaction is re-enqueued with
  `FundsWithdrawStatus::Insufficient` set in its `ExecutionEnv`. When the execution pipeline
  picks it up, it sees this flag and immediately returns

>   `ExecutionErrorKind::InsufficientFundsForWithdraw` — the Move VM never runs. The transaction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `ExecutionErrorKind::InsufficientFundsForWithdraw` — the transaction never runs. The transaction
```

3. **TX3**: max 500. Balance is 300 — insufficient. Result: **InsufficientFunds**.

The deduction uses the declared maximum, not the actual amount (which isn't known until
execution). This is conservative: it guarantees that if a transaction is approved, it will
have enough funds no matter how much it actually withdraws (up to its declared max).

If TX3 had arrived before TX2 in the consensus ordering, TX3 would have succeeded (600 ≥ 500)
and TX2 would have failed (100 < 300). This is why all validators must process withdrawals in
the same order — the ordering comes from consensus, and the scheduling result is deterministic.

### Why this isn't good enough

The wait-then-check approach adds unnecessary latency: every withdrawal blocks until its declared
version is settled on chain, even when the scheduler already has all the information needed to
decide it.

The key observation is that the scheduler itself sees every withdrawal reservation in the order
consensus assigned them. By the time a new request arrives, the scheduler already knows what
every prior reservation against that account declared as its maximum withdrawal — that is enough

> to compute the post-reservation balance without waiting for any of those earlier transactions to

Reviewer 2: it would be more accurate to say that knowledge of previous withdrawal reservations allows you to establish a lower bound on the available balance, rather than saying "it is enough to compute post reservation balance"
